Notes on: Dylan, B. (2022): The philosophy of modern song
=========================================================

`View on DouBan <https://book.douban.com/subject/35796307/>`_

.. code-block:: bibtex

   @book{Dylan_Philosophy_of_Modern_Song_2022,
     author    = {Dylan, Bob},
     title     = {The Philosophy of Modern Song},
     year      = {2022},
     publisher = {Simon and Schuster},
     url       = {https://book.douban.com/subject/35796307/},
   }

Chapter 2: Pump It Up
---------------------

A typical Englishman or Irishman, didn’t matter how much squalor he was living
in, always appeared in a suit and a tie.

Back then English people appeared in suits and ties no matter how poor they
were. With this manner of dress every Englishman was equal. Unlike in the
States, where people wore blue jeans and work boots and any type of attire,
projecting conspicuous inequality. The Brits, if nothing else, had dignity and
pride and they didn’t dress like bums. Money or no money. The dress code
equalized one and all in old Britain.


Chapter 8: Money Honey
----------------------

ART IS A DISAGREEMENT. Money is an agreement.

The only reason any of it means anything is because it ends.

It turns out both men have money occupying their thoughts. It drives one to
hide, the other to hunt him down.


Chapter 9: My Generation
------------------------

It might be helpful to take a moment and define terms just a bit. What exactly
is a generation? Currently, the common definition is the period of time that the
statistically largest portion of the population born within a thirty-year period
is in control of the zeitgeist.


Chapter 12: Pancho and Lefty
----------------------------

A BIG PART OF SONGWRITING, like all writing, is editing—distilling thought down
to essentials. Novice writers often hide behind filigree. In many cases the
artistry is in what is unsaid. As the old saying goes, an iceberg moves
gracefully because most of it is beneath the surface.


Chapter 37: Blue Suede Shoes
----------------------------

Shoes reveal character, station, and personality. Mothers used to advise their
daughters that they could tell a lot about a man by his shoes. In one of the
versions of The Prince and the Pauper, the prince is revealed by his shoes,
which he didn’t change with the rest of his clothes because he was unwilling to
sacrifice the comfort of his well-made footwear. Cinderella was identified by
the fit of her glass slipper.

Felix Edmundovich Dzerzhinsky, a.k.a. Iron Felix, trusted consort to both Lenin
and Stalin, led the early Soviet secret police organization known as the Cheka.
During the Red Terror, the beginning of the Russian Civil War in 1918, Lenin
asked him how many executions the Cheka was responsible for. Dzerzhinsky
suggested they count the number of shoes and divide by two.


Chapter 43: War
---------------

There is a sequence in the documentary The Fog of War where former secretary of
defense Robert McNamara discusses his and General Curtis LeMay’s role in
firebombing sixty-seven Japanese cities during World War II before the bombings
at Hiroshima and Nagasaki. In a single night, one hundred thousand men women and
children were burned to death in Tokyo on McNamara’s recommendation. It forced
LeMay to admit, “If we had lost the war, we’d all be prosecuted as war
criminals.” For the rest of his life, McNamara wrestled with the question “What
makes it immoral if you lose but not if you win?”

The simple answer sounds glib—history is written by the winners.

As a people, we tend to feel very proud of ourselves because of democracy. We
walk into that booth and cast our votes and wear that adhesive “I Voted” sticker
as if it is a badge of honor. But the truth is more complex. We have as much
responsibility coming out of the booth as we do going in. If the people we elect
are sending people to their deaths or worse, sending other people half a world
away—whom we never even consider because they don’t look like us or sound like
us—to their deaths and we do nothing to stop it, aren’t we just as guilty?

And if we want to see a war criminal all we have to do is look in the mirror.


Chapter 55: Old and Only in the Way
-----------------------------------

THERE’S A MOMENT EARLY ON IN Billy Wilder’s 1951 film Ace in the Hole where
hard-drinking, harder-living reporter Chuck Tatum, played by Kirk Douglas, is
driving to cover a local snake hunt outside of Albuquerque. Tatum has drunk
himself down the rungs of journalism from prestigious big-city broadsheets to
small-town penny savers. En route, he tells wide-eyed boy photographer Herbie
Cook (Robert Arthur) the secret of a good story. He tells him that a thousand
rattlers in the underbrush isn’t a news story. Even if they get loose, it’s too
big a number. But as the snakes get captured, public interest begins to swell.
And as the countdown gets closer to zero, it doesn’t matter that it’s less
dangerous, it’s the fact there is still one out there that preys on everyone’s
mind. And when there’s only one left, nobody can turn away from the story. The
kicker, he tells Herbie, is that a smart journalist would have that last snake
hidden in his desk so he can control both the story and the audience.

That’s the thing about numbers, if they’re too big they just become abstract.
Being a trillion dollars in debt means nothing when we follow the news, but if
you’re ten bucks short on rent, it sure gets your attention. It’s why war movies
are difficult to make. It’s difficult to dramatize the immense number of deaths
during Stalin’s Great Purge but an individual’s story during wartime, any war,
can be riveting. The metonymic storytelling of Private Ryan, Sergeant York,
Colonel Kurtz, Patton, Schindler, and Spartacus make for better films than ones
that try desperately to portray only the scope of conflict.

Chapter 56: Black Magic Woman
-----------------------------

LEIGH BRACKETT WAS BORN IN LOS ANGELES in 1915. She wrote for the science
fiction pulps in the early forties but moved to screenplays after Howard Hawks
read No Good from a Corpse, a detective novel she wrote in 1944. Hawks was
looking for a writer who could collaborate with William Faulkner on the Humphrey
Bogart movie he was set to direct, an adaptation of Raymond Chandler’s novel The
Big Sleep. Hawks, thinking that Brackett’s hard-boiled style would add some
blood and guts to the script and unable to glean the author’s gender by name
alone, famously told his assistant, “Get this Brackett guy.” Luckily, that
Brackett gal was not offended and helped Faulkner navigate the novel’s
labyrinthian plot. It was her that Bogart asked who killed Owen Taylor, the
chauffeur in the Philip Marlowe story. Brackett, Faulkner, and Hawks were all
stumped and a telegram was quickly sent to Chandler, who went back through his
book and wired back, “I don’t know either.”

It was in this context that Brackett presaged the third of Arthur C. Clarke’s
three laws of science fiction—Any sufficiently advanced technology is
indistinguishable from magic. She wrote, “Witchcraft to the ignorant… simple
science to the learned,” implying that Rhiannon’s gift, commonplace in Matt
Carse’s home era, seemed like magical miracles in the pre-technological past.

Yet one place where additional learning does not disentangle the mystery of the
subject is music. As a matter of fact, the argument can be made that the more
you study music, the less you understand it. Take two people—one studies
contrapuntal music theory, the other cries when they hear a sad song. Which of
the two really understands music better?

E.B.White had a saying about humor that seems applicable to music: Analyzing
humor is like dissecting a frog. Few people are interested, and the frog dies
of it. But that has never stopped people from depending on facts, laws, rules,
and structure so much that the joy of discovery is leached out and the magic
in the melody is sucked away.

People can keep trying to turn music into a science, but in science one and one
will always be two. Music, like all art, including the art of romance, tells us
time and again that one plus one, in the best circumstances, equals three.

Chapter 61: Don’t Let Me Be Misunderstood
-----------------------------------------

When Gilbert Stuart first translated Albert Camus’s 1942 French novel The
Stranger into English, that first sentence seemed straightforward enough. But it
has generated verbiage many times the word count of the book itself, as
translators have gotten themselves mired in not only the ambiguities and time
paradoxes of French verb tenses that don’t exist in English, but also how the
order of words in sentences weights those tenses.

And then there is the matter of Mother herself. In the original French of the
opening line: “Aujourd’hui, maman est morte,” Camus uses maman purposely instead
of mère, which is the more formal word for mother. Maman is more colloquial,
somewhere between Mommy and Mum, so from the beginning, the translator miscolors
the narrator’s relationship with his dead parent.

Subsequent translators and commentators have parsed the language, trying to pull
themselves up from the morass of varied French verb tenses—to explain the
difference between passé simple and passé composé. It is not easy. From the
1700s to the late 1900s there was even an informal rule to help French authors
choose between the two tenses. Called the Twenty-Four-Hour Rule, introduced by
the French printer and scholar Henri Estienne, it stated that the passé composé
had to be used for events taking place within a single twenty-four-hour period,
but anything outside that period could use the passé simple.

Today, Esperanto is still around, though some remember it best as the
inspiration for ESP-Disk, a New York–based record label formed in 1963 with the
objective of releasing Esperanto-based music, but today remembered for
recordings by Albert Ayler, Pharoah Sanders, William Burroughs, and the Fugs.
And you can use Google to translate to and from Esperanto.

Chapter 65: Waist Deep in the Big Muddy
---------------------------------------

Sometimes the difference between religion and science can be measured in the
distance between the unanswered and the unanswerable question. People live in
fear. For instance, at the end of the day when the sun disappeared people were
afraid it might never come back. Religion calmed them with a solution to the
unanswerable question—the Greek god Helios dragged the sun across the sky every
morning in a golden chariot. It was his job, he would do it every day, and that
calmed the fear of living in darkness.

Time passed and science made discoveries and unanswerable questions began to get
answered. The Earth spun on its axis and revolved around the sun. Helios
retired.

Pete Seeger returned to CBS and sang “Big Muddy” for the Smothers Brothers
audience. It made news when he didn’t sing it and it made news when he did.

That’s because everybody was tuned in to the same TV shows—people against the
war, people in favor of it. We all had a shared baseline cultural vocabulary.
People who wanted to see the Beatles on a variety show had to watch flamenco
dancers, baggy-pants comics, ventriloquists, and maybe a scene from Shakespeare.
Today, the medium contains multitudes and man needs only pick one thing he likes
and feast exclusively on a stream dedicated to it.

There’s twenty-four hours of blues, surf music, left-wing whining, right-wing
badgering, any stripe of belief imaginable. There are stories as interesting as
lemming suicides and totally true, like the fact that whale songs have
inexplicably lowered in pitch 30 percent since the sixties. But these stories
are buried on animal documentary channels, where they will probably never
capture the general public’s imagination.

Turns out, the best way to shut people up isn’t to take away their forum—it’s to
give them all their own separate pulpits. Ultimately most folks will listen to
what they already know and read what they already agree with. They will devour
pale retreads of the familiar and perhaps never get to discover they might have
a taste for Shakespeare or flamenco dancing. It’s the equivalent of letting an
eight-year-old pick their own diet. Inevitably they’ll choose chocolate for
every meal and end up undernourished with rotted teeth and weighing five hundred
pounds.

Chapter 66: Where or When
-------------------------

But so it is with music, it is of a time but also timeless; a thing with which
to make memories and the memory itself. Though we seldom consider it, music is
built in time as surely as a sculptor or welder works in physical space. Music
transcends time by living within it, just as reincarnation allows us to
transcend life by living it again and again.

